docs: create BitVM page (#448)
bob-collective/bob: docs/docs/learn/introduction/bitvm/index.mdx

---
sidebar_position: 2
sidebar_label: "BitVM"
---

import BitvmDiagram from "./bitvm-diagram.svg";

# BitVM: A New Paradigm for Bitcoin

## Introduction

Building on Bitcoin is fun once again!

> BitVM plays a crucial role in BOB's [Hybrid L2 Roadmap](/learn/introduction/roadmap) by [enabling Bitcoin finality](https://blog.gobob.xyz/posts/bob-integrates-with-babylon-to-become-a-bitcoin-secured-network-bringing-bitcoin-finality-to-the-hybrid-l2) for our rollup. BitVM also makes it safer for BTC holders to participate in DeFi on BOB by [minimizing the trust needed to bridge](https://blog.gobob.xyz/posts/bob-announces-trust-minimized-bitcoin-bridge-prototype-powered-by-bitvm). From the network infrastructure to the tokens in your wallet, BitVM unlocks huge security advancements for Bitcoin DeFi.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
BitVM plays a crucial role in BOB's [Hybrid L2 Roadmap](/learn/introduction/roadmap) by [enabling superior Bitcoin bridging](https://blog.gobob.xyz/posts/bob-announces-trust-minimized-bitcoin-bridge-prototype-powered-by-bitvm) for our rollup. BOB will integrate a native Bitcoin bridge via BitVM that will serve as a backbone for Bitcoin DeFi in synergy with the [Babylon LSTs and LRTs](https://blog.gobob.xyz/posts/bob-integrates-with-babylon-to-become-a-bitcoin-secured-network-bringing-bitcoin-finality-to-the-hybrid-l2). From the network infrastructure to the tokens in your wallet, BitVM unlocks huge security advancements for Bitcoin DeFi.
```

Read on to learn how BitVM enables Bitcoin rollups and a new type of BTC bridge with a "1-of-N" trust assumption - all without a soft fork to Bitcoin.

> ## Why BitVM Matters

Reviewer: Could be a bit more explicit about the USPs and why it's better.

TLDR: 
- BitVM2 is a major improvement over previous BitVM versions. 
- BitVM Bridge is now the most secure BTC bridge design. 
- The paper is the more comprehensive write-up of the BitVM2 design so far. 

BitVM2 is:
- Secure: optimistic computation secured by Bitcoin
- Practical: only 3 tx to complete a challenge 
- Permissionless: anyone can challenge 

BitVM Bridge is the most secure BTC bridge to date. 
- BTC Bridges so far: t-of-n multisigs, honest majority assumption. 
- BitVM Bridge: 1-of-n security model, where anyone can challenge and prevent theft.

Author: I appreciate the clarity here. I'll add it and note a couple questions.

Before we dive into technical details, let's introduce a few products that BitVM makes possible on Bitcoin.

BitVM enables:

- Vastly improved bridge design: users can deposit and withdraw BTC from an L2 without trusting multi-sig custodians
  - [BOB is developing a trust-minimized BitVM bridge with Fiamma](https://blog.gobob.xyz/posts/bob-announces-trust-minimized-bitcoin-bridge-prototype-powered-by-bitvm)
- Bitcoin rollups that verify the Layer 2 state directly on Bitcoin
  - [BOB will receive Bitcoin finality from Babylon](https://blog.gobob.xyz/posts/bob-integrates-with-babylon-to-become-a-bitcoin-secured-network-bringing-bitcoin-finality-to-the-hybrid-l2)
- Significant decreases in the trust assumptions that Bitcoin users make when interacting with off-chain protocols
- An entirely new design space for applications built directly on Bitcoin

> ## BitVM Non-Technical Summary

Reviewer: Quite a technical, non-technical summary :) But I guess that is fine

Author: Agreed. Upon review, I think each line is something I want the reader to know. This is why killing your darlings is hard, I suppose!

1. During the setup step, each operator commits to the program by depositing collateral.
1. Each operator continually runs the original program (e.g. a bridge) off-chain to determine the correct outputs of each input (e.g. how much BTC to withdraw and who to send it to during a bridge peg-out).
1. The operator uses their own funds to cover the program's output (e.g. sends their own BTC to a withdrawing user), then requests a reimbursement by withdrawing funds from BitVM (i.e. the set of funds being managed by the operators).
1. If challenged, the operator must reveal all of the intermediary program results (i.e. each of the inputs and outputs of the sub-program chunks). If the operator is cheating, at least one of the sub-program results will be fake.
1. **Anyone can disprove the operator by executing that specific sub-program in a Bitcoin transaction, showing that the operator's attempted withdrawal was invalid.**
1. The bad operator is kicked out and cannot access the BitVM funds.

:::tip Practical and Permissionless
Anyone can challenge a dishonest operator with only three Bitcoin transactions.
:::

## BitVM Bridge Summary

> One of the most exciting applications of BitVM is a BTC [light-client](/learn/builder-guides/relay) bridge on Bitcoin. Specifically, BitVM reduces the trust assumptions needed for a safe _peg-out_ when users want to withdraw or unwrap their BTC back to Bitcoin.

Author: I hadn't realized how different the relay and bitvm light client are in structure, location, and role. Thanks for clarifying!

> One of the most exciting applications of BitVM is a BTC [light-client](/learn/builder-guides/relay) bridge on Bitcoin. Specifically, BitVM reduces the trust assumptions needed for a safe _peg-out_ when users want to withdraw or unwrap their BTC back to Bitcoin.

Author: > The BOB block hash is part of a Babylon checkpoint on Bitcoin with at least 100 Bitcoin confirmations

My remaining confusion about peg-outs is about the sequence of things. Surely the operator is reimbursed before 100 Bitcoin blocks pass. What, if anything, depends on the Babylon checkpoint?

1. Operators pay BTC to the withdrawing user from their own funds and then reclaim the BTC from BitVM.

> 1. BitVM checks that there is a correct peg-out on Bitcoin matching the unwrap transaction on the L2.

Author: Is this revision of the third step here correct?

1. Operators pay BTC to the withdrawing user from their own funds and then reclaim the BTC from BitVM.
2. A smart contract on BOB uses the [BTC relay](/learn/builder-guides/relay) to verify that there is a correct peg-out on Bitcoin corresponding to the withdrawal request by a user on BOB. If this check passes, a burn event on BOB is emitted.
3. _BitVM checks that there is a correct peg-out on Bitcoin matching the burn event on BOB._
4. If all is correct, the operator gets the BTC refunded.
5. If the operator has committed fraud (e.g. by sending BTC to their wallet instead of the user's), the refund transaction is prevented and the operator is slashed and kicked out.

1. If all is correct, the operator gets the BTC refunded.
1. If the operator has committed fraud (e.g. by sending BTC to their wallet instead of the user's), the refund transaction is prevented and the operator is slashed and kicked out.

> Under correct operation, the bridging process completes in less than one hour in each direction. This is much faster than existing Ethereum L1 or L2 bridges to Bitcoin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Under correct operation, the bridging process completes in less than one hour in each direction for users bridging in and out. This is much faster than existing Ethereum L1 or L2 bridges to Bitcoin.

The operators of the BitVM bridge require roughly 7 days to return their BTC from the BitVM instances.
```

## Common Misconceptions

- "BitVM" is not a virtual machine (VM) like the Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM) or the Java Virtual Machine (JVM); it is not an execution environment for arbitrary programs. Rather, each instance of BitVM is a way to use existing tools in Bitcoin to create on-chain fraud proofs for off-chain execution of a specific, pre-determined program (e.g. a bridge or rollup).
- In its current design, a specific BitVM instance only supports deposits and withdrawals of a fixed amount defined at setup, such as exactly 0.1 BTC. A user can only `PegOut` (i.e. withdraw) an amount that exactly matches a previous `PegIn`. A potential workaround is to create several instances of BitVM for the same purpose (e.g. bridge), each corresponding to a different `PegIn` size (e.g. 0.1 BTC, 1 BTC, 10 BTC).

> - The 4GB program is never put on-chain. That would require 1,000 separate transactions, each the size of an entire Bitcoin block! Instead, the setup process includes the creation of a Taproot tree that represents the relationship between the inputs and outputs of all the intermediary sub-programs. The last Tapleaf in the tree is used for the `Payout` transaction, enabling the operator to claim the funds if the program execution is not challenged.

Reviewer: It's only roughly 1 GB by now (actually a bit less with optimizations)

### Video and audio resources on BitVM

- [BitVM Uses a 'Compilation of a Couple Tricks' to Overcome Limitations of Bitcoin's Script: Robin Linus](https://finance.yahoo.com/video/bitvm-uses-compilation-couple-tricks-141723622.html)
- [What is BitVM? with Robin Linus and Super Testnet (SLP520) - Stephan Livera Podcast](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XxqQU6j6jI8)
- [Zero Sync - Bitcoin Amsterdam](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rubs5SrkGsM)
- [BitVM two way peg design - Ordinals Show](https://twitter.com/i/spaces/1YqKDgYMqlvxV?s=20)
- [BitVM - A Tiny Web3 Podcast](https://twitter.com/cartesiproject/status/1729893087143759950)
- [Everything on Bitcoin with Robin Linus & Super Testnet - Bitcoin Audible](https://pod.link/1359544516/episode/413027f0bdb982a8593d50f4466930f5)
- [BitVM Takeover with Super Testnet - Layer Two Labs](https://x.com/LayerTwoLabs/status/1712855344764834076?s=20)
- [BitVM, Convenants and Scaling - Bitcoin News](https://x.com/BitcoinNewsCom/status/1715392573555040265?s=20)
- [BitVM and UTXO Dealership](https://twitter.com/i/spaces/1OyJAWapbAOKb)
- [BitVM Discussion - Ordinals Show](https://x.com/TO/status/1716265121373172075?s=20)

### Related Github Repos

> - [BitVM Toy Implementation](https://github.com/BitVM/BitVM)

Reviewer: This is the official implementation, not a toy anymore :)

sidebar_label: "BitVM"
---

import BitvmDiagram from "./bitvm-diagram.svg";

# BitVM: A New Paradigm for Bitcoin

## Introduction

BitVM plays a crucial role in BOB's [Hybrid L2 Roadmap](/learn/introduction/roadmap) by [enabling superior Bitcoin bridging](https://blog.gobob.xyz/posts/bob-announces-trust-minimized-bitcoin-bridge-prototype-powered-by-bitvm) for our rollup. BOB will integrate a native Bitcoin bridge via BitVM that will serve as a backbone for Bitcoin DeFi in synergy with the [Babylon LSTs and LRTs](https://blog.gobob.xyz/posts/bob-integrates-with-babylon-to-become-a-bitcoin-secured-network-bringing-bitcoin-finality-to-the-hybrid-l2). From the network infrastructure to the tokens in your wallet, BitVM unlocks huge security advancements for Bitcoin DeFi.

Read on to learn how BitVM enables Bitcoin rollups and a new type of BTC bridge with a "1-of-N" trust assumption - all without a soft fork to Bitcoin.

## Why BitVM Matters

tl;dr:

- BitVM2 is a major improvement over previous BitVM versions.
- [BitVM Bridge](https://blog.gobob.xyz/posts/bob-announces-trust-minimized-bitcoin-bridge-prototype-powered-by-bitvm) is now the most secure BTC bridge design.

> - BOB's co-founder, Alexei Zamyatin, co-authored [the most comprehensive write-up of the BitVM2 design so far](/learn/reference/research#bitvm2-bridging-bitcoin-to-second-layers).

Author: Too explicit? Could be "We co-authored" or simply "This paper is". It links to our research page, at any rate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- BOB co-authored [the most comprehensive write-up of the BitVM2 design so far](/learn/reference/research#bitvm2-bridging-bitcoin-to-second-layers).
```

:::tip Practical and Permissionless
Anyone can challenge a dishonest operator with only three Bitcoin transactions.
:::

## BitVM Bridge Summary

One of the most exciting applications of BitVM is a BTC light-client bridge on Bitcoin. Specifically, BitVM reduces the trust assumptions needed for a safe _peg-out_ when users want to withdraw or unwrap their BTC back to Bitcoin.

1. Operators pay BTC to the withdrawing user from their own funds and then reclaim the BTC from BitVM.
1. A smart contract on BOB uses the [BTC relay](/learn/builder-guides/relay) to verify that there is a correct peg-out on Bitcoin corresponding to the withdrawal request by a user on BOB. If this check passes, a burn event on BOB is emitted.
1. BitVM checks that there is a correct peg-out on Bitcoin matching the burn event on BOB.
1. The operator uses the BitVM light client to create a SNARK, proving that

   - there is a burn event on BOB that burns bobBTC,
   - the BOB block that includes the burn event was correctly created,
   - the BOB block is signed by Babylon Finality Providers (FPs) staked on Bitcoin,
   - the BOB block hash that includes the burn event is stored on the Babylon chain, and

>    - the BOB block hash is part of a Babylon checkpoint on Bitcoin with at least 100 Bitcoin confirmations.

Author: I like being explicit, but happy to remove these steps if it's too wordy.

Reviewer: It's good!

1. If all is correct, the operator gets the BTC refunded.

> 1. If the operator has committed fraud (e.g. by sending BTC to their wallet instead of the user's), the refund transaction is prevented and the operator is slashed and kicked out.

Author: Please review this modified section for correctness.

Reviewer: Correct
